foreign
I'm Norman Wobberger. Today we're carrying on
with this new approach to box arithmetic where we
are trying to put the duality between objects and
anti-objects sort of foremost in our arithmetic.
This is a very novel approach to arithmetic
because it's really building on a 20th-century
physics understanding discovery of the fundamental
duality between particles and anti-particles in
our sort of subatomic world, which is really a
remarkable development in 20th-century physics
and really ought to rank up there with relativity
and quantum mechanics in terms of the significance
of it. So what we're going to do today is
to proceed by more or less concentrating on
notation nomenclature. I'm going to introduce
variants to the things that I've already been
talking about now with this view of trying
to put this duality center stage for us.
Okay, so roughly what we're going to do is if we
have some object, then the anti-object will be
denoted by a hyphen object. That's our general
orientation, okay? That will be used quite
frequently and correspondingly
when we want to talk about both
these objects, whatever they are, and the
anti-objects together, I propose to include them
in a bigger sort of category or classification
by using a capital letter. So in this case,
capital O object. Okay, so a capital O object
will include both these little o objects and their
anti-objects. So that's just a very general
kind of thing. So let's see how it works for
these boxes and the arithmetic of them. So
the basic idea is that we're going to build
up arithmetic using boxes, and now centrally,
crucially, we are going to suppose that we have
two different kinds of boxes: black boxes and red
boxes, okay? Not just one, we have two different
kinds, and these are somehow opposite or antis
of each other. So we'll agree that the black ones
are to be denoted by boxes. These are the boxes,
and the anti-objects or A boxes will be denoted
in red. So if we have some box with something
inside it, let's say it's the box called B,
and then we consider a very identical box which
has the same things inside it but now has a red
boundary instead of a black boundary, then we'll
refer to this as B super A or the anti of B.
Okay, now both these little B boxes and the
A little B boxes are included in the broader
classification of capital B boxes. Okay, so when
we write capital B, then we're referring to both
objects in black as well as their anti-objects in
red. Okay, so to start the story, we look at the
simplest kind of boxes, which are the zero boxes,
but now there are two of them, not one. Okay,
so our world starts with two things: the
empty black box, just an ordinary box,
and its anti-object, you know, in red. It's a
red box, so I'll refer to this first one as zero,
and we'll refer to the second one, the red one,
as anti-zero or A0, consistent with our notation.
And when we write it numerically, we'll write
just an ordinary zero for this black one and a
zero with an A superscript for the anti-zero
or A zero. And both of these together will
be included in this type called capital zero.
Okay, so when we talk about a capital zero, we
could be either talking about this zero here, this
black one, or this anti-zero here, this red one.
Okay, what can we do with just zeros? Well, we
can add them. Now, when we were just talking about
M-sets before, we just had empty M-sets, and then
it was obvious that the empty M-set plus the empty
M-set was the empty M-set, but now things are a
little more complicated because we have these two
kinds of fundamental zero objects, so we have to
specify the addition for all possible pairs. So a
black empty box plus a black empty box is another
black empty box, and similarly, a red anti-zero
plus a red anti-zero is a black box or a zero. And
otherwise, black plus red equals red, and red plus
black equals red. So we could say this also in
the language of zeros and anti-zeros. So zero plus
zero is zero, zero plus anti-zero is anti-zero,
anti-zero plus zero is anti-zero, and anti-zero
plus anti-zero is zero. So this is a pretty
fundamental kind of thing, and we justify this
because we want the arithmetic that we are
going to create to be somewhat consistent. Okay,
and so this is a good way to proceed. Okay, now
we can extend this consistently to sums of more
boxes or anti-boxes, in this case, just zero
boxes. So for example, if we have an anti-zero
and a zero and a zero and a zero and an anti-zero
and an anti-zero, and we add them all up, okay,
so then we can do it in a number of ways, but we
can just think about really what what's crucial
is the number of anti-zeros. So that's going
to determine the type of the resulting thing.
In this case, there's an odd number of red ones
or an odd number of anti-zeros, so the result is
going to be another anti-zero. Zero anti, so the
sum depends only on the parity of the number of
anti-boxes. If there are an even number of
anti-boxes, then the result is zero, while
if there are an odd number of anti-boxes, then the
result is anti-zero. Okay, so now we're going to
define recursively what a box
is, what a capital B box is,
and we're going to start the initial objects
are the two zero boxes: the zero box and the
anti-zero box. Okay, and we declare that these are
both capital B boxes. Okay, and then there's only
one more thing, which is a kind of an inductive
definition. So we agree that if we have X, Y,
up to say Z, these are already defined boxes,
capital B boxes, then we'll agree that so are
these two things: the black box containing X and Y
and so on up to Z, call it A, and the anti of that
object, which is a red box containing exactly
the same elements containing X, Y, up to Z.
Okay, so this thing here is a box because it's
black. This thing is an anti-box because it's red,
and these are antis of each other because
the contents are otherwise exactly the
same. The only difference between these
two is the color of the bounding box.
Okay, and just a little bit of additional
notation: we'll say that in this case, X, Y,
up to Z, these are the elements of the capital B
boxes A or anti-A. So this is really the story of
the objects that we're going to be considering.
We're just going to create recursively
more and more complicated boxes, capital B boxes,
by recursively creating boxes by nesting them. And
once we have nested boxes, then we can use
those as elements of further nested boxes,
and that's what our arithmetic is going
to consist of. And that's going to be
a much wider and bigger arithmetic than we
currently have. Okay, much wider and bigger.
foreign
To distinguish these two types of capital B
boxes, we'll say that a box is a capital box
of positive type, and we'll denote the positive
type by this particular symbol like a plus sign
with a circle around it. Okay, not to be confused
with addition. So this is just a symbol denoting
this positive type, which is associated with a
box that is something that's got black around it.
Similarly, an anti-box or A box is a capital
box of negative type. It will be denoted by
a minus sign. This is not a theta; it's
a minus sign enclosed in a circle. Okay,
so these are the two possible types of a capital
box. You know, a capital box you can ask is it
either a positive type or a negative type, and
to tell you just look at the color of the outside
box. If it's black, then it's positive; if it's
red, it's negative, independent of what's inside.
Okay, so then we can express this summation of
zeros, this aspect of counting the number of
anti-boxes, by saying that the sum of zeros is
a zero, again, whose type is the product of the
types of the constituents. Okay, well, so we have
to define what we mean by a product of types. So
that's sort of the obvious thing. So we'll agree
that positive times positive is positive, negative
times negative is positive, positive times
negative is negative, and negative times positive
is positive. So that's just the same as it is
in ordinary life. Okay, so that's how we can say
how to determine the type of a sum of zeros,
let's say, but in fact, of more general boxes.
So for example, here, here we've got three
black boxes and three red boxes. These are
the corresponding types underneath the plus or
positive type, positive type, negative type,
positive type, negative type, negative
type. To determine the type of the sum,
okay, which is going to be another zero,
but what kind of zero, what type of zero,
we just form the product of all these types. Okay,
and well, that's going to be negative because
there is an odd number of negatives. So you get a
negative, and that means that the resulting sum is
an anti-box or anti-zero in red. Okay, the crucial
annihilation creation sort of property that we
insist that objects and anti-objects have is that
if we have a box, capital B, and its anti-box,
BA, B super A, or anti-B, if they both occur
in a box, a capital B box M, okay, then they
mutually annihilate each other. This means
that they both disappear. They both disappear.
That's the crucial relation that we
have between boxes and their antis.
Okay, so let's look at some examples. So
here is a box. It has two elements in it,
and these elements are antis of each
other because the contents are exactly
the same. There's two red boxes inside
them, but one's black and one's red,
so these are antis of each other. That means they
mutually annihilate, and the result is an empty
box or a zero. Here is a red box that has three
elements inside. Two are these red boxes, and
here's a black one. The contents of all three are
the same. So this first red box, for example, this
is an anti-box. It's the anti of this box here
because the contents are the same. There's two
black boxes inside them. So these are opposites or
antis. They're going to mutually annihilate each
other. They're going to disappear, and we're just
going to end up with this remaining fellow. So we
end up with this red box with a red box inside and
two black boxes inside it. Over here, we've got a
black box with four elements inside, and there's
some cancellation because inside this first box
there's a zero and an anti-zero, and they're gonna
then mutually annihilate each other, so we're
just going to get an empty box there for that one
there. And over here, this one here and this one
here are antis of each other because the contents
are the same. There's two red boxes in each of
them, but one's black on the outside, the other
one's red on the outside. So these are antis.
They're going to mutually annihilate each other.
Poof, they're gone. So that just leaves us with
this red one down here in the corner additionally,
but now we have a black box, an empty
box, and here's a red version of that. So this is
zero, this is anti-zero. They mutually annihilate
each other. There's nothing left, and we just end
up with a single empty box. The resulting thing
is zero. Okay, so now we can introduce natural
numbers and then integers. So a natural number,
first of all, is a box of zeros. Okay, now notice
it's a small B box. That means we're talking about
a black thing, okay? And it's a small Z zero.
That means we're talking about an empty black box.
So it's a box consisting of a lot of empty
black boxes. That's a natural number.
So aside from zero, the fundamental new natural
number is this one here. It's a black box with a
single black box inside it. That's the number
one. So in our world, that is the number one.
But we have other things which are also natural
numbers. For example, this thing here is the
number four, what we usually call the number
four. And this thing here is also a natural
number because it's also a box of zeros. It's a
box that has no zeros in it, but nevertheless,
it's still a box of zeros, and so that's zero.
So zero also is counted as a natural number.
Now, a big departure from usual
arithmetic, an a natural number,
okay, just consistent with our notation to
get the anti of something, we just stick an
A with a hyphen in front of it. So an a
natural number is an anti-box of zeros.
So for example, here for ante, there are four
black boxes inside a red box. So this is the
anti of the four above here, and the anti of
this thing is zero anti. So these are both
anti-natural numbers. Okay, so we
got these two types: little Nat,
little N, not N, a little N not. And now a
natural number with a capital N. So a capital
natural number is either a natural number or an a
natural number. So we're going to enlarge the view
of what a natural number is, at least when it has
a capital in front. So the use of the capital is,
yes, indeed, rather crucial here to keep
the distinctions that we want. Okay,
so the capital N Nat is now a type that
includes both natural numbers and their antis.
These anti-natural numbers, these are objects
which are not found in traditional mathematics.
We've been doing mathematics for
thousands and thousands of years,
and I think this is really the first
time where we have anti-natural numbers,
and I'm claiming that they are actually playing
a very important, crucial role in our arithmetic.
Okay, and to bring that to the fore,
we introduce the idea of an integer.
An integer without a capital is a box of
capital zeros. It's a box of capital zeros,
so that means it's black, but the elements
in it can be either zeros or anti-zeros.
An a integer is an anti-box or an a box of capital
zeros. So it's again a box, but now a red box
consisting of a whole bunch of zeros, and the
zeros are capital zero, so they could be either
empty black boxes or empty red boxes. So we have
these two types: little I int and a int. And now,
consistent with before, we'll define a capital I
integer. A capital integer is either an integer
or an anti-integer, and we'll introduce int now to
refer to either integers or anti-integers. So for
example, this thing here is a natural number,
but it's also an integer. It's a box of zeros.
This is actually a little I integer.
This thing here is an a integer.
It's a red box consisting of zeros.
This thing here is a black box also consisting of
capital zeros. So this is another integer. This
is what we would normally call minus three, this
is what we call three. This thing here, we don't
have a traditional name for it, so we have to
make up a new name. This is three ante, the anti
of this thing. We also don't have a traditional
name for it. Here's what it looks like. So this
would be minus three ante or three bar ante.
These are all examples of capital I integers.
Right, okay, so additional boxes, this fundamental
operation, which at the multi-set level we've
seen is absolutely fundamental, is what
distinguishes the data structure of multi-sets
from all the other ones, is that multi-sets
support this most elementary of operations,
the addition. You just dump stuff out into another
box. So we're doing very much the same thing here,
but we have to just be a little bit more careful,
a little bit more subtle, because we have to keep
in mind the colors of the boxes, either black or
red. So to add capital boxes, what are we going to
do? We're going to form a new capital box whose
elements are all the elements of the original
capital boxes and whose type is the product
of the types of the original capital boxes.
So we're going to do just as we did before, we
take the contents of all these capital boxes,
that means they could be boxes or anti-boxes,
the outsides could be black or red,
we're going to dump them all out. Okay,
the elements all get put into another box,
but the color of that new box now has to be
determined. It's determined by the color of
all the various original boxes that we are taking
the stuff dumping out of. Okay, so we have to take
the product of the types of the original boxes to
determine the type or the color of the final box.
So for example, here we're adding
these three boxes. All right, so
first what we do is we just take the
elements and dump them out into a box.
So these two guys here get copied there,
these two guys here are copied down here,
and these guys here are copied here. Okay,
and then we put this in a box, but we have to
determine what's the color of this bounding
box. So we go up to here and we say, okay,
these are type, well, this is a negative type,
this is a positive type, this is a positive type.
So the product of those types is negative,
that's why we have a red bounding box.
But there is some simplification possible here
because this thing here and this one here are
antis of each other, so they're going to cancel.
Okay, and also this zero and this anti-zero are
also going to cancel, so we're just going to be
left with this object here and this one here.
So we get an anti-box overall since negative
times positive times positive is negative.
And we note that the sum of natural
numbers is also a natural number,
and the sum of capital integers is also
a capital integer. We get, however, an a
integer if there's an odd number of a integers in
the sum, and otherwise we get an integer. Okay,
and now we have a result that we can convince
ourselves of, that in this great generality
of addition of arbitrary capital boxes, that
it's actually commutative and it's associative.
Now I can talk about the multiplication of capital
boxes. So to form the product a times b of capital
boxes A and B, we take the capital box of all
possible sums a plus b or little a plus little b,
where little a belongs to A, in other words, is
an element of A, and little b is an element of
B. And of course, we have to take each element
with the corresponding multiplicity, that is,
we're going to take each element no matter how
many times the similar kind of thing appears,
where the type of a times B, so the resulting
type of this big box is the product of the types
of A and B. So it's the same rule as we used for
the addition of boxes, also for multiplication.
So in terms of a special case, the special case
is just the products of zeros, of capital zeros,
and that multiplication table is just like the
addition multiplication table. So 0 times 0 is 0,
0 times anti-zero is anti-zero,
anti-zero times zero is anti-zero,
and anti-zero times anti-zero is zero. And
I remind you that we had justification,
we had good reason for defining things this way,
but curiously, it is a table which is identical
to the addition table for capital zeros. And
of course, we notice, as we have before, that
there are some curiosities about this, maybe even
some disconcerting aspects, in particular this
property that 0 times anti-0 is anti-zero. That's
disconcerting because it's different from the
familiar rule that zero times anything is zero,
right? That's a rule that we're used to for any a,
but this does not hold here. It holds much of
the time, but it does not hold when capital A
is an anti-zero. In that case, the right-hand
side is not zero, it is rather anti-zero.
Okay, and here's an example. So here's a box
A, and here's an anti-box B. Okay, the roof
is missing there. There it is. Okay, and so to
take their product, what do we do? Well, we have
to take all possible sums. So we start with this
one here, maybe this box here plus this one here,
and then this one plus this one, and this one
plus this one. So this first row we're adding
this empty box to each one of these three. And so
now for the second row, the second element here,
first of all, I'll add it to this thing and then
add it to this one and then add it to this one.
We get these guys here, and so now we have to
evaluate these by our prior notion over addition.
So we do that. So adding zero to something
doesn't change it, so we get just this thing here,
this thing here, this thing here. And then when we
do the sum here, okay, here we have summation, so
we're going to get three black boxes inside, but
the outside is going to be black because negative
times negative is positive. Over here, we have
negative times positive, so we're going to get an
anti-box with two black boxes inside. And,
is that right, with two black boxes inside?
No, not with three things inside. That should
actually be two things inside, shouldn't it?
Because we're just adding this thing here to
that, yes. So pardon me, this thing here should
be eliminated. It's just a red box with two black
boxes inside it. And lastly, this thing here,
have I done that one right? We've got four black
boxes, yes, and the type of the bounding box is
negative, so it's really red. Okay, so it's
almost correct. A calculation of A times B,
and then we have a theorem that multiplication
of boxes is also commutative and associative.
Now that we have both addition and
multiplication of general boxes,
we can ask about how they relate. To
what extent does the distributive law,
which is this thing here, hold that A plus B
times C should be A times C plus B times C?
Okay, so we've already observed that the
distributive law doesn't always hold, and that's
evident even just at the level of the zeros, the
capital zeros. Because if we have a zero plus
an anti-zero and we multiply it by anti-zero,
and zero plus anti-zero is anti-zero, so we're
getting into zero times anti-zero, which is zero.
On the other hand, the distributive law asks us
to calculate zero times anti-zero plus anti-zero
times anti-zero. This thing here is anti-zero,
this thing here is zero, and their sum is
anti-zero. So the distributive law does not hold
generally. That's a little bit disconcerting, but
it's actually not that bad when we realize that we
have the following result: that the distributive
law actually holds for A, B, and C boxes,
that is, their black things. Okay, so I'm going
to just show you why that is so in considerable
generality. Suppose that there are three boxes, A,
B, and C, and A has, say, elements X, Y, up to Z.
B has elements K, L, up to M, and C has elements
P, Q, up to R. Okay, then when we calculate A plus
B times C, so there's A plus B, just the sum of
the two M sets, and it's going to be black, okay,
times C. Here C, which roof is up here. So what
we're going to get is we're going to get the M set
of all possible sums, and since it's black times
black, we're going to get black. Okay, so it's
positive times positive is going to be positive.
So we're going to get elements X plus P, X plus Q,
up to X plus R, and then Y plus P, Y plus Q, up to
Y plus R, and then Z plus P, all the way up to Z
plus P, Z plus Q, Z plus R from that top row, and
then down here K plus P, K plus Q, up to K plus R,
L plus P, L plus Q, up to L plus R, all the
way up to M plus P, M plus Q, up to M plus R.
On the other hand, when we look at the other side
of the distributive law, A times C plus B times C.
So here they are again. Okay, so we have
to look at A times C plus B times C,
then what do we get? Well, here's A times C, so
X plus P, X plus Q, all the way up to X plus R,
then Y plus P, Y plus Q, up to Y plus R, all the
way up to Z plus P, Z plus Q, up to Z plus R,
and something similar for B times C. And then when
you look at these things and compare their sum
with this, you see that you're getting exactly the
same elements. Okay, so yes, indeed, we do get A
plus B times C, so things work because everything
is in black, and so the black times black is just
black. Okay, so we see that the problem with the
distributive law is not really a deep problem,
it's just sort of a surface problem having
to do with the color of that outside box.
Okay, so now let's go to polynumbers, which
is actually sort of where most algebra takes
place. Okay, but now we have this sort of enlarged
point of view. So first of all, a definition: a
polynumber or a poly is a box of capital integers.
A box, so it's black. Okay, that's a small poly.
That's a type. An anti-polynumber or a
poly is an A box of capital integers.
That's type A poly there. Okay, so then a capital
polynumber or a capital poly is either a poly or
an anti-poly, and we have the type capital poly.
So this is a little bit different because formerly
we called these things integral polynumbers.
So roughly speaking, I want to elevate integer
arithmetic, that's sort of the nicest arithmetic
in some sense. Okay, and so our polys are going to
be associated with integer arithmetic, that's
sort of really nice algebra. So for example,
the fundamental new poly that we get, okay, this
alpha thing is where we have a box inside a box
inside a box, and what's inside here is the
number one. So this is a box containing one.
Alpha squared will then be the square of this
thing, so we have to multiply this thing with
itself. That means we have to make a box whose
element is the sum of this thing and this thing.
So when we add these two things here, we're
getting one plus one, which is two. So we're
getting the box which has a single two in
it, and so on. Alpha cubed will be the box
containing a single three, etc. So for example,
we can combine these things. So this thing here,
it's a box, it's got a zero there, a zero there, a
three there. So this thing is 2 plus alpha cubed.
But in the world of poly, there are now more
possibilities because these examples are all
just black things, but we can have black things
and red things. So in particular, this thing here
is of interest. So we have a black box which
contains a red box which contains a black box.
So this is minus alpha or our preferred notation
alpha bar. Why is that? Well, because if you
take alpha, which is this, and you add it to this
thing, when you add these, you're going to get a
black box with this thing inside it and this thing
inside it, but these are antis of each other,
so they cancel, and you're just going to get zero.
All right, another possibility is this thing here,
which is a black box containing a black box
containing a red box. That's alpha to the
minus one or another way of looking at it, it's
the box containing minus one or one bar. And
why is that? Well, because if we multiply alpha,
here's alpha with this object. Okay, then what we
have to do is we have to form the box because
we're taking the product of two boxes of this
box here and this box. Yes, now when we add these
two things, okay, when we add these two things,
well, the contents will annihilate each other,
and we're just going to get an empty box,
which is one. So that's why this thing deserves to
be called alpha to the minus one, because when we
multiply it by alpha, we get one or alpha to zero.
And you can check that another possibility is to
take a black box containing a red box containing
a red box. That's minus alpha to the minus one.
So that's just sort of the start of polynomial
arithmetic, but it's, as we've seen before,
in some sense, a bigger arithmetic than usual
because of the existence of these negative powers
of alpha playing essentially just as important
a role as positive powers. So this is a bit of
a departure from the calculus point of view
towards polynomials. It's a bigger picture.
And very briefly, then, of course, the next
stage up, there's a whole hierarchy of stages,
or maybe we should say the next stage down, are
those multi-numbers. Okay, and similarly, we can
define a multi-number or a multi, that should
be a multi, is a box of capital polys. Well,
an a multi-number or an a multi is an a box of
capital polys, and then a capital multi-number
or a capital multi is either a multi or
an anti-multi. And we have this new type,
and this world here is something of a new
world. We haven't explored it very much, okay,
but there will be some interesting twists
in this multi-number world, as we'll see,
but we can see this entire chasm of arithmetic
below us. So we're just at the top rungs with
the usual algebra, polynomial algebra, and there's
this vast chasm underneath us with all kinds of
complexity because these things can be layered
and we could get blacks and reds layering in all
kinds of interesting ways. And we should expect
that the behavior of these objects depends sort
of on the relative colorings of these various
nested layers. So in principle, this is a huge
and maybe sort of almost mind-blowing arithmetic
that we have in front of us, but lots to explore.
And of course, a crucial question is, you
know, is this the arithmetic of the world?
I'm Norman Wobberger. Thanks for listening.
Let me know if you need any further assistance!